July 2nd,
1976, 9 a.m.
in the morning.
Interviewee,
Russell
R-U-S-S-E-L-L Watson, W-A-T-S-O-N, Raitt,
R-A-I-T-T. place, Scripps Institute of
Oceanography, University of California.
Professor Raitt, would you first tell us when and
how you first developed an interest in the sea?
Well, I think it began when I was doing wartime
research at Point Loma. during World War II when I
was engaged in undersea warfare research in an
attempt to do something about submarine warfare.
Then it became clear that there was very
inadequate knowledge about the ocean and that
some of my research ability could be useful. Now
you had earlier worked, had you not, In the
Engineering Corps? No, not in the Engineering
Corps, if you mean in the military. No, no, I mean
seismograph. I had worked for five years doing
geophysical exploration using seismic
reflection technique. And then from there, then
you went on to work in war research. What took you to
war research? I think it was... recognition that
the U.S. would be involved in the war sooner or
later, and it was necessary for people with
technical knowledge to come to some help in
dealing with the situation, particularly the
submarine. German submarines were sinking,
shipping across the Atlantic very rapidly, and if
it continued very long, that England would have
been completely isolated. So they formed a
laboratory down here at Point Loma, National
Defense Research Committee. And, well, I heard
about that through my connections with Caltech.
And so I joined them in the summer of 1941. What were
you doing with Caltech? I had some indirect
association with them because my work in
geophysics was working with a company in which the
other members of the company were also graduates
of Caltech. And I had friends there. I had no direct
association with Caltech in the sense of being on
the staff or anything like that. Did any of the work
you did with the Geophysical Engineering Corps
direct you towards the sea? Yeah, that was
Engineering Corporation. Geophysical
Engineering Corporation was engaged entirely in
doing exploratory seismic reflection work
looking for oil structures. It had nothing to do
with working the sea. Who organized the research
after you arrived at Point Loma? Well, the
director at that time was Vern Knudson, professor
of physics at UCLA.
Did you propose the work you did with underwater
sound and impulse waves yourself, or were they
predetermined missions? No, I was working. I was,
as all of us there were, really working on projects
that were We were
working on the program of the laboratory. The
responsibility of the laboratory was to do
whatever seemed most appropriate for our
experience and the problems most appropriate to
to learn as rapidly as possible those things that
would be useful in undersea warfare. So I
particularly was working on assigned projects,
not things that I initiated myself. Of course, the
ideas of how to do it and so on came from the people
that were carrying out the work. But we generally
worked on projects that were requested by the
management. Did you notice a goodly number of
people coming through this sort of work in the war
to move on into the field of oceanography after the
war was over? Quite a few of them, yes, like myself,
whose interest in oceanography developed
through this work that they came in from other
fields but continued on in oceanography. Yes, I
was not the only one. Did you feel, or do you feel, as
if the connection between oceanography and
military has been beneficial for oceanography? I
think so. Yes, and on the whole, the
relationship
with the military has been beneficial in a number
of ways. Did you think that perhaps in your contact
with the military, let's say particularly later
on, the military might have been too
mission-oriented vis-a-vis, let's say, hard
science in terms of projects it funded? That's
possible about some of the work, maybe. Some of the
R&D, government R&D, probably is too much
mission-oriented. My contact is in two phases.
One is the phase where I was doing work in wartime.
The emphasis naturally was mission-oriented
then, and it was only a recognition of the
deficiency of knowledge about the ocean that led
me to continue later. Later, after the war, the
work I've been doing is not mission-oriented at
all. It's research, fundamental research, and
there's quite a difference there between the
wartime work and the post-war work. Would you
comment at least upon the discovery of the deep
scattering layer, speaking of pure research, how
it came about, with whom you were associated? Yes,
I participated in that directly, and it came about
because one of the first assignments I had was to
learn about the scattering that came out of the sea
because this was directly interfering with the
detection of submarines by echo ranging and this
is the scattering that comes through organisms
that are diffusely scattered throughout the sea
not just things like whales and fish and so on that
give discrete echoes give a general scattering,
which sounds very much like the reverberation
that you hear in an auditorium when a sound is
emitted in an auditorium, it's reflected back and
forth and dies away. The sound that you get out of
the sea when you send a pulse into it sounds very
much like that, so they call it reverberation. So
we were studying reverberation because it was
interfering with the detection of submarines.
When we directed an extrasonic projector into the
ocean, to study the volume reverberation, we
directed it vertically downwards in order to
eliminate the reverberation that came out of the
surface, which is separate from that that came out
of volume. As soon as we did that, we found that the
scattering was not uniformly distributed
throughout the scene. Before that, everyone more
or less assumed that there was something
scattering there that was uniformly
distributed. As soon as we put it downward, we saw
immediately that there were layers. And that came
very early in the study of reverberation out of the
sea. So that was, in a sense, a scientific
discovery that was completely unexpected and a
byproduct of work which was directed towards a
practical study of reverberation. You keep
saying we. With whom were you involved? Well, I
was, as everybody else working there, was
involved in some sort of group activity. And the
group I worked with was led by Dr. Eyring.
There were two Eyrings. I think his name was Carl
Eyring. He's a physicist from Utah, Brigham Young
University. The other man was Ralph Christensen.
Irene Christensen and myself were working
together studying reverberation. So this was a
joint activity, not any one person was
responsible for it. Did you suspect at that time
that it was caused by masses of fish and animals, or
was this...? Yes, I think there, let's see, at that
time, there was a vast ignorance, and no one
really
knew for sure. Even then, it wasn't certain
what it came from, whether it was from organisms
living in the sea or from some structure of the sea
itself. However, I think very quickly it became
apparent that it wasn't the structure of the water
itself, but it was the organism. I think the fact of
the deep scattering layer was the strongest
single thing showing that because the scattering
layer
existed fairly deep in the ocean where the water
structure is fairly uniform Scattering from
areas where there's more layering, like the
thermocline, was much smaller. So there were
various things that indicated it was... I think
the strongest indication was biological and was
that the scattering layer moved up and down
diurnally.
And it came up at night and went down during the day.
And which is well known... vertical migration of
plankton and other small fish and so on. Well, was
vertical migration known at this time? Yes. Yes, I
think Martin Johnson was the one who was most
influential in pointing that out because he had
studied the vertical migration of plankton by
taking plankton net studies and so on. So he was
aware of this diurnal migration of the organisms
and see, and he was also at the laboratory, not at
first, he wasn't there quite as early as I was, but
he came later on from Scripps Institution and
joined the same laboratory. He's here now, by the
way, if you want to talk to him. Did the discovery
aid your individual research? Did this discovery
of scattering layers move you more firmly into
oceanography? Perhaps, yes. It was an exciting
thing to happen and certainly it makes the field
more interesting when you find that with fairly
simple experiments you can make fundamental
discoveries. The joy in scientific research is
making discoveries and so that So this is kind of
the motivation that led me into oceanography. It
was such a wide open field that one could go out
almost any direction and discover new knowledge.
And so that was an interesting time to get into
oceanography. It's been suggested that the 1950s
and early 60s were, in effect, the age of
exploration as far as oceanography was
concerned. And this might now be closing off.
that, quite frankly, more oceanography may be
done away from vessels and on land as oceanography
becomes a more particular rather than broad
field. Would you agree with that? Well, let's see.
I think oceanography will continue a study of the
oceans by ships going out into the ocean. The age
of, let's see, the first exploration, I think, or
the age of geophysical exploration of the ocean is
still continuing. But it's past this initial
phase, which is similar. The thing that we got
into, in a sense, was almost similar to the period
of the 16th century exploration of the oceans that
started with Europeans like Columbus and other
people going out. But the exploration is still
continuing. And new things are still being found.
And I think it'll be a long time before you can study
oceans by sitting in a desk.
Some people have suggested that to be a good
oceanographer, it's necessary, in effect, to get
your feet wet to go out on vessels. Do you agree with
that?
Well, I don't. I don't. Maybe it's not. It isn't...
Maybe it isn't necessary for every oceanographer
to get his feet wet, but some of them sure do.
Otherwise, oceanography is an experimental
science. Everything that's been learned about
the sea is learned by somebody going out into the
ocean and observing it. And the people, however,
that have worked with data that's made very
fundamentally useful contributions to
understanding the data that's taken by people
that make observations.
Now, why did you and four others form the Marine
Physical Lab? Oh,
that's not an absolutely simple question to
answer there. There are aspects of that that
involve, let's say, the
whole subject of why it was desirable to support
research in oceanography.
The Marine Physical Laboratory was one of a number
of, let's say, quite a number of efforts to, let's
say, to carry out this need for research in
oceanography. And it came into being through Navy
support and recognition by people in the Navy that
that more fundamental research was needed in
oceanography. Marine Physical Laboratory was
set up to emphasize those aspects of oceanography
that are associated with the propagation of sound
in the sea. And, however, this was not, it wasn't It
wasn't oriented towards application of
underwater sound, but rather to
understand the fundamental properties of the
ocean that were related to the propagation of
underwater sound. Understand? And how it came,
the details of how it came into being is a fairly
complex story, which I don't have all of the
answers to it, although I may have remembered it at
one time in the past. But I think quite a bit of this
is written up, the details of how the Marine
Physical Laboratory came into being. And the main
person, of course, involved in that and would not
have come into being if he hadn't taken a very
active and aggressive role, and that was Carl
Eckert. And he was the important person in the
Marine Physical Laboratory. And I was one of the
people that was fortunate enough to become
associated with him in the formation of the
laboratory. How did you meet Carl Eckert? And I met
him first in this wartime laboratory, which I
mentioned right at the beginning of the
interview. I met him very shortly after I joined
there in the summer of 1941. He came from the
University of Chicago. And
then after, would you agree with this, as the war is
winding down, it becomes apparent that more pure
research has to be done in the sea, and from this,
then, the marine physical lab evolves? That was
it. It was a strong feeling of a number of people,
both in the academic world and in the Navy, that the
research that really began during the war should
be continued, particularly in those fields which
had been opened up during the war but on which no
work really could be done because the emphasis had
the necessity to be placed during the war on the
application of knowledge rather than on the
acquisition of knowledge.
The Marine Physical Laboratory, was it funded by
the Office of Naval Research?
There was no Office of Naval Research at the time
Marine Physical Laboratory was formed. So the
funds initially came from the Bureau of Ships.
Now, what types of information about the bottom
were you able to gather as a result of techniques
you developed with sound transmissions?
Well, let's see.
All of our knowledge, I think, of the ocean bottom
is gained through that kind of technique, this use
of underwater sound. All of the information comes
by studying the reflection of sound. from the sea
bottom or from layers underneath the sea bottom,
or by propagation through the sea bottom that we
call refraction. So basically there are two
fields here of study, one called the reflection of
sound, the other refraction of sound.
This is, I
think, what shows the association between the
knowledge of the sea floor, the structure of the
sea floor, and the propagation of sand is that we
learn a good deal about the nature of the sea bottom
by studying the underwater sand at the same time
one gains a good deal of knowledge about how sound
is propagated by learning about what flies
beneath the sea floor. It's a very important part
of the whole problem.
When did you come to Scripps? Well, the transition
to Scripps was a gradual one. I started at the end of
the war in the Marine Physical Laboratory, was a
branch then, or in a sense, a division or a
laboratory
of the University of California, separate from
Scripps Institution.
As time went on, the relation with Scripps
Institution became stronger and stronger. And
then
I believe, I can't remember the exact date,
probably in 49, I got an appointment as associate
professor at Scripps Institution. But my
association with Scripps began before that,
although I wasn't really part of the academic
staff or faculty at Scripps. I was still
associated with them. I believe I taught a course
here in Underwater Sound before I was out. on the
faculty. So the transition was not a dramatic,
abrupt one, but a gradual one. What happened to the
Marine Physical Laboratory when you came to
Scripps? Well, it continues and still is in
existence. And because of my
residents here on the campus and other people from
Marine Physical Laboratory, a branch,
essentially, of Marine Physical Laboratory here
on the campus, as well as a continuing activity
down at Point Loma. Well, so then you make a
transition then from the Marine Physical
Laboratory to be finally full-time at Scripps.
But I'm still part of the Marine Physical
Laboratory at
even though I'm a member of Scripps on the faculty,
the research I've been conducting through the
Marine Physical Laboratory, which is a research
division, in a sense, of Scripps Institutional
Oceanography.
Now, had you always been interested in teaching,
or did the teaching at Scripps develop, let's say,
in addition to research? My teaching is really
research. I teach whatever effectiveness I have,
and teaching is owing to maybe graduate students
learning how to do research for me. I'm not a
teacher in the sense of lecturing to students, but
rather one in which helping them with research
problems. Now, when you came to Scripps, how large
was the faculty here? Do you remember? That would
be hard for me to say. I think you'd better look that
up. It would be, of course, much smaller than it is
now. Well, it'll roughly quadruple while you're
here. And as it quadruples, what happens in terms
of sound transmission, working seismology? Does
it do it? Do you seem to give direction to that part
of the extension of the faculty? The whole field
has changed. And
let's say
my own involvement in what I call seismic methods
of study came from the, let's say, from the sound
aspect. However, that's not generally true. And
most people getting into this field do it the other
way, from being directly interested in seismic
work and then applying that to the ocean. So
let's say there is a seismology involved here on
the campus, for example. and of a more, you might
say, more of a classical seismology. Professor
Bruhn, for example, is a leading member of that
field. He's been president of the Seismological
Society of America. And there are other people at
the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary
Physics, IGPP, who are worldwide prominent in
this field of seismology, which is really dry land
seismology in a sense, but it's evolved from the
land, but it's also getting more involved into the
ocean. So there's this approach from really two
different directions, from the idea of sound
propagation, one hand, and the other, you might
call it continental seismology, earthquake
seismology, and so on. It's that earthquake
seismology is moving into the ocean. That's one of
the current developments, very active. And I
think some of the leading work is being done right
here at Scripps Institution, up at the IGPP, in
that they're putting instruments out on the
bottom now. Instead of just having them on dry
land, they're putting seismographs. On the
bottom, study earthquakes.